in the early
church there was a debate around the
physicality of Jesus's resurrection yes
so the canonical tradition ends up uh
stipulating that Jesus physically
resurrects and you must believe that
otherwise you're herit yeah and that's
part of the the Catholic particular
emphasis on the Divinity of the body a
lot of the Gnostic
tradition says that the thing that
that's being gotten wrong is the idea
that there was this literal Resurrection
right no no the kingdom of God is here
and now the resurrection is inside of
you and you you attain it through nosis
I mean the Gospel of Thomas doesn't even
mention the resurrection doesn't mention
the crucifixion it's a list of sayings
yeah and the the very form of that of
that collection shows that these people
believed that the thing that's important
is not what Jesus did but what he said
[Music]
so I'm here today speaking with Alex o
Conor who's flown in from London I'm in
La
um he's known also as Cosmic skeptic and
he runs a podcast within reason and so
you
can subscribe to and listen to that
podcast watch it on YouTube Alex was
recommended to me by a friend of mine
John Veri who was a who is a professor
along with me at the University of
Toronto I've done a lot of different
public events with with John many
conversations and uh Alex has
interviewed many of the people that I'm
interested in including Richard Dawkins
and he is very interested in religious
matters although he's not a Christian
and we believed jointly that it would be
useful for us to meet and to hash out
our differences in Viewpoint and
similarities and see if we could get
together move together
somewhere valuable and enlightening and
so that's what we're trying to do that's
what we try to do with the conversation
um it focuses mostly
on the nature of belief I suppose that's
probably the easiest way to sum it up
what it means to believe something what
it means to have a religious belief what
it means to be committed to a belief um
we talk fair about too a fair bit about
the distinction between let's say
the distinction between fact and fiction
and the idea
that fact reflects the real but so does
fiction and
so welcome
to the discussion of all
that so first of all thank you for
coming here it's a long way from London
we're in LA and so that's a long ways
and so um and in so far as you're going
to disagree with me I'm pleased that
you're exhausted from the flight because
that'll slow you down and that'll be
helpful so anyway seriously thank you
for coming and course so let's start
with this Cosmic
skeptic right okay so how do you come up
with the name and and and why the
conjunction and what's what what do you
think the advantages if any in
relationship to the emphasis on
skepticism I'll give you the official
and The Unofficial Story the official
story is that Cosmic sort of implies
universe space big thinking and skeptic
uh sort of situates me within a
tradition of people who are interested
in interrogating their beliefs uh to
their sort of
fundamental uh fundamental grounding in
so far as that's possible and skeptic is
sp with a K because most of my American
most of my listeners are are American
The Unofficial answer is that uh when I
was younger I knew a guy who was a
musician and started a Soundcloud
account with the word Cosmic in it and I
thought hey that sounds like a cool word
and I was starting a YouTube channel I
wanted to sound something that sounded
cool and I thought Skeptics sounded cool
next to it and I spelled it with a K
because I got it wrong I see okay okay
well well who knows the actual
derivation then it's a good combination
though because it it well it's catchy so
that's nice from a marketing side but it
also has
this it's an interesting illusion to the
combination of Revelation and critical
thinking that actually makes up actual
thinking right because the problem with
being concerned with a vast plethora of
ideas is that many ideas are misleading
and wrong and so you have to learn how
to combine that openness and curiosity
with the capacity to separate the wheat
from the chaff and that's the utility of
skepticism I mean it can degenerate into
a kind of argumentative nihilism that's
the downside but properly applied it it
uh it separates the wheat from the chaff
right and the purpose of that is to keep
the wheat well skepticism can only ever
be essentially destructive because
you're being skeptical of something
somebody's putting something forward and
you're sort of responding to that with
skepticism and so for a lot of people if
if skepticism is the thing that you do
then you sort of end up chipping away
and ending up with nothing whereas
skepticism is really supposed to be a
tool that you use it is destructive but
in the way that you might sort of um
carve a piece of marble you're intending
to get a statue out of it at the yes yes
well that's the thing to always keep in
mind is skepticism in the service of
something exactly yeah it's a tool it's
a methodological tool it's not a you you
mentioned too and so I'm interested in
your progression in your thinking in
relationship to that because you
mentioned just before we actually went
on air that had you come to see me a
couple of years ago you might have been
more inclined to I I'm putting words in
your mouth to some degree so correct me
if I'm wrong to strive for a victory or
to make your point something like that
and you will alluded to the fact that
your thinking around that has changed to
some degree I suspect that's probably a
consequence of experience so what's
changed in part it might have something
to do with becoming a podcaster and
speaking weakly to people and you can't
keep up that energy you can but it
becomes totally unwatchable and and
nobody wants to nobody wants to engage
in that all the time I think there there
are times when it's worth doing and to
be clear you know I still like to to
disagree and do so essentially
unapologetically and bluntly and that
can still come is quite rude but I think
that the way that I would think about a
conversation is that well what what are
we about to do here a debate we're about
to debate an issue and I'm going to try
to win and and that's and not not even I
mean maybe there's sort of an element of
pride in there you want to for that sake
but also you really think well I want to
win because I think I'm right about this
and if I don't then you know I must have
just not expressed myself properly I I
think I you know I what I probably meant
when I was saying that is that I would
have had more of that cap on than now
after having so many conversations with
so many people and realizing that not
only is it more constructive for myself
I've learned a lot more you know now now
I'm here like hey I might you know I
might learn something today that would
be great even if I just learn something
about what your worldview is um but also
people listening just unanimously say
that they prefer it it's it's a much
well this the skepticism so one of the
things you learn as a therapist for
example is that being right is not very
helpful especially when you're trying to
help someone
because whether you as the therapist is
right right has very little to do with
the positive outcome for
them you still want to maintain the
skepticism and there one of the ways of
doing that in the manner that's helpful
is that like if I'm talking to you and
you say something I don't understand
that's the right place to be skeptical
because if I don't understand what you
said well it might be my ignorance but
it also might be like lack of clarity
and pointedness on your part m and so
one of the advantages of disagreeing
with someone is to point out to them in
a positive way where they're lost in the
fog because if you're sufficiently lost
in the fog you tend to run into sharp
objects and that's not very pleasant so
but the skepticism and and this is
obviously what you alluded to I would
say as a consequence of learning from
the podcast is the skepticism should be
in service of rectifying your ignorance
rather than in service of making your
point or winning the argument problem
with winning a bloody argument is that
the victory can seduce you into thinking
that you were correct and you're never
sufficiently correct right yes and
so I don't like debates fundamentally
I've never really enjoyed them I
probably when I was really young yeah
you know be before I was I I stopped
doing this when I was about 23 I would
take a certain amount of pleasure in
being able to obtain intellectual
Victory you know it was also way I
defended myself when I was young and it
was effective
but it's not the optimal way to conduct
a conversation this is one of the
reasons why people like Rogan are so
successful because Joe Joe will push his
point but he always does it in the
service of learning yes he doesn't do it
in the service of victory yeah yeah I I
think I think you probably put your
finger on it there um but what you were
saying a moment ago
about Precision about sort of thinking
clearly and understanding somebody else
clearly I think the reason why I'm
excited to speak to you today is because
you're someone who celebrates being
precise in your speech and I've always
appreciated your your desire to make
sure that you're really understanding
what somebody else is saying I've made
attempts in the past to I mean my
channel is mostly focused on the
philosophy of religion yes and I've made
attempts in the past to try to
understand your worldview yeah your
religious world and I made a video essay
um
and some of the things I said there I
think I at least one thing in particular
I'd probably think I was wrong about but
what I was trying to do there I've seen
that people would ask you on on
interviews and podcasts you know do you
believe in God do you think that
Christianity is true and it was sort of
you would sort of struggle to answer the
question and I thought to myself well
people come at the question with a prior
commit commitments about what they think
truth constitutes yeah that's a big
problem there there must be something
important that's being left out of the
the sort of precondition of that of that
question or conversation if if it's so
if it's so unimaginably difficult to
answer you know um well I'll give you an
example I I watched that essay this
morning right and I also wanted to talk
to you about your discussion with
Dawkins yeah
so people say ask me for example do you
believe in God and I think well I don't
know what you are driving at with that
question because I don't know what you
mean by believe most people modern
people believe that a belief is a
description of accordance with a set of
facts sure right well I don't think
that's what belief means in the
religious sense in the least so I just
think that's a non-starter something to
do with what you act out right it has to
do with what you're what you believe is
what you're willing to die for
fundamentally is what you're committed
to or live for if you think about it as
life in the most extensive manner it's a
matter of commitment so I understand
what you what you mean in the religious
context religion is a big topic religion
is is a is a is a mighty you know area
to be to be talking about but when I
talk about belief in a more mundane
sense like I I believe that this chair
exists yeah like that is a belief that I
hold I sort of can't help but that Bel I
can see it well that's a place where
you're action and your statements align
exactly you believe in the chair and
you're sitting in it it's like fair
enough which is why I I totally agree
when you say that what you believe might
really be what you act out but I think
when when people are looking for
essentially definitions and just a
second ago you said well what is it to
believe and you said well what you
believe is what you're willing to die
for yeah I'm not willing to die for my
belief that this chair exists maybe
maybe in a broad sense if if if not
belie if not believing that the chair
existed required me to sort of give up
my trust in my sense data right then I
might literally die by accident by sort
of walking off a cliff cuz I don't trust
my eyes anymore so also not something
that you to forgo given your role let's
say as a rational skeptic right
seriously like it's a commitment that
you've made to a certain view of reality
but but you understand surely that when
somebody asks do you believe in God
although they're asking the the sort of
subject of the belief yeah is a much
more Grand uh entity the word belief
itself for them at least in their
question even if you think it's an
inappropriate question they mean
something much more mundane they mean
you believe in well it's hard to know
it's hard to know what people mean you
know like one of the things I've noticed
for example is um there are no shortage
of Christian Trolls MH right I mean
there are atheist trolls and there's
engineering trolls there's lots of
trolls but there are Christian Trolls
and the Christian Trolls when they ask
that question and it's often the
Christian Trolls who ask that question
what they mean is are you in my club
exactly right and my answer is I'm not
even sure you know what club you're in
so there's a trap in the question which
I don't appreciate cuz I don't like like
questions that have traps in them yes um
now not not everybody who's asking that
question has a trap but many people do
and so I find that off-putting let's say
because it's manipulative in terms of
that that descriptive belief that's
something we could go into I think we
should do that because it does get to
the core of the matter that you were
attempting to untangle let's say in your
essay yeah I mean my my understanding of
of and I had to sort of piece together
different things you'd said in different
interviews and I suppose the reason I
had to do that was because I didn't have
you in front of me so I'm grateful to
have the opportunity now it it seems to
me that when you speak of God you mean
something like that which is at the I
don't know if you'd rather say the basis
or the top the basis or the top both
metaphors of a value hierarchy and it
begins with the recognition that
anything that anybody does requires some
kind of value even just to do something
as as simple as sitting in a chair or
picking up a glass well you don't do
anything without it being oriented
towards a value exactly right and so
even to perceive the glass it's
something you've spoken about before you
know why do I see the glass as one
object uh even though it's got multiple
Parts it's got a side and a bottom and
top I I see them together in a way that
I don't see the the cup and the table as
one object well you said before it's
because I can grip it it's sort of
functional it's because I can use this
cup and the reason that I see it in that
way is because I can then drink from it
and the reason that I I want to do that
is because I sort of value my health and
and there's sort of a a value uh regress
that goes
on and more broadly this this comes out
in the question of like you know why you
writing an essay to get a good grade or
why you why do you want a good grade to
get a good job why do you want a good
job to get money and you keep going back
and back it has to terminate somewhere
that's right because otherwise there
would be nothing to sort of lend that
that value well otherwise you'd always
be in an infinite reg right you just die
question infite yeah you literally
you're it's the kind of um regress in
which the value that you have for for a
actually borrows the value from from B
you don't you don't you don't value a at
all without B so it doesn't get it
without B and B doesn't get it without C
and get it without so that went on
infinitely there's nothing to give the
the entire sequence value in the first
place and so there's got to be something
at the basis here and then you said at
least on on one occasion that we'll call
that place whatever's at the top there
we'll call it the Divine place and you
said we'll make
that y now I'm kind of I'm fine with
this but it seems to me that that what
you're doing is you're giving a
definition of God that makes himal or
makes it him whatever unavoidably exist
and also makes it a quite different
entity to The Entity described by a
great deal of for instance your
Christian uh your Christian listeners
who will say that God is not the the
basis of a value hierarchy God is an
omnipotent omniscient agential being
with Consciousness that intentionally
brings about human beings and sent down
a physical man to sacrifice his life in
order to save us for our sins now that
means that when someone asks you does
God exist and you say well look I I I
think that's that's almost an
inappropriate question I in at times you
sort of imply that you don't even
believe in atheists because you sort of
act as if you believe in God if what you
mean by God is just well dkin himself
admitted he was a cultural Christian
that's another matter because that's
much more specific I mean that's
cultural Christianity right this is just
Al a
ref but but you know when someone when a
Christian says to you I I'm being very
clear that that's what I mean by God I
don't know if you do believe in the
omnicient omnipotent agential being but
if you start talking about the
inevitability of believing in some basis
of a value so obvious it's not so
obvious from the traditional
judeo-christian perspective that God is
properly conceptualized as a being
that's that's right well so so It's
Tricky right because one of the ways
that you can approach God traditionally
is in relationship to a being but that's
a veil so why do I say that okay so so
let's speak about it religiously first
then we can speak about it conceptually
so there's a tremendous insistence
in the judeo-christian tradition that
God is outside of the categorical
structure right like seriously outside
Elijah the prophet establishes that God
is not in nature he's not in the
earthquake he's not in the configration
he's not in the storm right so that
doesn't mean that nature doesn't speak
of God but it does mean that whatever
God is is not in the natural world okay
now we can extend that not bound by time
not bound by space well does that mean
make God a material object because when
people say is God real which is a
variant of the question is do you
believe in God it's like well God's
immaterial and outside of time and space
so if your definition of real is
material things in the domain of time
and space then we're not talking about
the same thing now usually people
approach that question of belief with
some materialistic framework like that
in mind even if they don't know it the
Christian let's say um who put this
question forward in the hope of getting
the answer they want to
hear are materialistic and Enlightenment
Minds even though they don't know it
because they have an implicit definition
of what constitutes real is God real
it's like no no God's hyper real that's
not the same thing I think that the the
physicality of God is an interesting
question yeah in the in the Old
Testament tradition it seems to evolve
as as far as I can see if you look at
some of the the earlier Des ions of of
God you've got a God who you got a God
who walks through the Garden of Eden
yeah you've got a God who has a council
of of of angels and and the accuser you
have a sort of it's being at least
conceptualized as a much more physical
being and as time goes on God becomes uh
less localized and I I've heard a lot of
theories as to why that's the case I've
just done an episode on my own show yeah
I'm not I'm not sure that's true exactly
I don't think there's a clear historical
progression like that there is a
constant tension
between God as ineffable and then God as
Manifest in a manner that's
comprehensible right and if so mer eliad
mapped the consequences of this out to
some degree so he was very interested in
nich's proposition that God had died
M most people including n regarded that
as like a unique historical event there
was a religious tradition the
enlightenment arose in consequence
we became skeptical about God and in
1850 the philosophers decided that he
was no longer necessary or real but
eliad who who is a brilliant historian
of
religions has noted that this has
happened many many times that God has
vanished disappeared and one of his
explanations for that is that a God
that's too ineffable so that's
completely outside of the categories of
time and space let's say and who doesn't
make himself present as a being who
doesn't have a Heavenly Council who has
no hierarchy between the Pinnacle and
Earth itself tends to float off into
space becomes so abstract that you can't
have a relationship with it him and then
he disappears in many ways this is what
Christianity provides with the New
Testament and the figure of Jesus and
that's why I think for a lot of
Christians the more important question
for you and the question that they're
interested in and and you're quite right
that a lot of people are like I want to
get you on my team I have no dog in this
fight I'm not a Christian but I know
that a lot of Christians are frustrated
when they begin asking about Jesus who's
a much more physical entity right it's a
real human being it's someone in flesh
and blood it's someone who's physically
crucified by the very different
questions very different question and
then and then is is seen as a physical
entity at least according to the to the
canonical tradition by his disciples
after he died yeah so when somebody asks
you do you believe that that happened
and when I've seen you ask about that
question you tend to still speak in
terms of the psychological and the
mythological I think the frustration is
that as you've just said yeah
thatting Christians on at that regard
either because the truth of the matter
is with regard to the gospel accounts
that the mythological and the historical
are inex
inextricably cross-contaminated sure
there's no pulling out the historical
Jesus right that just that's that's a
non-starter the and why that is I don't
know it's it's very it's very mysterious
it's very hard to understand as is are
are the let's say the accounts of the
Resurrection okay so what do I think
about that well I don't I think that
denying the historical reality of Christ
is I think that's just a Fool's errand I
don't know why anybody would bother with
it so so a man exists called Jesus we
that much now Christ now there's a claim
that that is attributed to Christ that
he is the embodiment or the Incarnation
the Fulfillment let's say of the prophet
and the law yes I think that's true
uhhuh yeah what does that mean
well you know what did I think it's in
the Gospel of John I think Gospel of
John closes with a statement that
something like if all the books that
were ever written were written about the
gospel accounts that wouldn't be enough
books to explain what it happened all
the things that Jesus did yeah yeah and
it's and it's there's a there's a truth
in that the truth is
that profound religious account is
bottomless and the biblical
representations are like that there's no
limit to the amount of Investigation
they can be not least because the text
in itself is deeply cross referenced so
there's like there's an innumerable
number of paths through it it's like a
chessboard and so it it's it's
inexhaustible in its interpretive space
that's true and that's a problem too
because it it means it's also
susceptible to multiple interpretations
including potentially competing
interpretations I think a lot of people
interpret pool for example um the
earliest New Testament source as saying
that if Jesus did not literally rise
from the dead if if there was not a man
who stopped breathing and then started
breathing again then your faith is
futile and you're still in your sins
that is Christianity is undermined now
that means that and Paul doesn't say
sort of believing that that's false is
really bad he says if you do not believe
this proactively yeah then your faith is
the problem I have with if you don't
proactively believe that yourself then I
think when a Christian asks you you know
do you believe in the resurrection of
Jesus are you a Christian I think you
must be committed to saying no at least
under that interpretation of Paul and
and even if you're not sure I mean it's
fine if if I say to you do you think
that a man physically rose from the dead
and you say something like well I don't
know I mean I wasn't there but I think
it has a lot of mythological
significance or I think that maybe it
happened in in a different sense or it
happened in the sense that good fiction
happens you know then fine but it needs
to begin with that caveat of of the
simple sort of historically speaking I
don't know and I know you don't like to
pull out the historical Jesus that's a
good objection it's an important
question no of course it's a very good
ction so the so I just did a seminar on
the gospels with crew of about eight
people and was the same crew that walked
through Exodus with me with a couple of
variations and we spent a lot of time on
the resurrection accounts for example
and of course that was the toughest
let's say that was the toughest morsel
to chew and digest the thing about the
resurrection accounts is that they're
all look so I could say something like
this which will just annoy people but it
doesn't
matter I believe the accounts but I have
no idea what they mean when you say you
believe the accounts do you mean and and
I I hate to be sort of yeah pedantic
here it seems pedantic but do you mean
you believe that these are things that
happened such that if I if a Str I know
you don't like that let me put it this
way if if I went back in time with a
Panasonic video camera and put that
camera in front of the tomb of Joseph of
arthea
would the little LCD screen show a man
walk out of that tomb I Would S suspect
yes so that that is that to me seems
like a belief in the historical event of
the Resurrection or at least of Jesus
leaving the tomb which means that when
somebody says you know do you believe
that Jesus rose from the dead it doesn't
seem clear to me why you're not able to
just say it would seem to me
yes because I have no idea what that
means and neither did the people who saw
it have you ever browse in incognito
mode fun fact it's probably not as
Incognito as you think and why would it
be big tech companies have made their
Fortune by tracking your movements
online their defense Incognito does not
mean invisible so how do you actually
make yourself as invisible as possible
online you use expressvpn it turns out
that even in incognito mode your online
activity is still tracked and data
Brokers still buy and sell your data one
of these data points is your IP address
data Harvesters use your IP to uniquely
identify you and your location but with
expressvpn your connection gets rerouted
through an encrypted server and your IP
address is mased every time you connect
to expressvpn you get a random IP
address shared by many other expressvpn
customers this makes it hard for third
parties to identify you or harvest your
data best of all expressvpn is super
easy to use no matter what device you're
on your phone laptop or smart TV all you
have to do is tap one button for instant
protection so if you really want to go
Incognito and protect your privacy
secure yourself with the number one
rated VPN visit expressvpn.com
Jordan to get three extra months for
free that's
expressvpn.com Jordan go to
expressvpn.com Jordan to learn
more h i mean I suppose one look look
here's here's let's let's let's approach
this obliquely let's say the miracle of
the Loaves and the fishes yeah okay so
people will say well do you believe that
happened literally historically it's
like well yes I believe that it's okay
okay what do you mean by that that you
believe that
exactly yeah so so you tell me you're
there in the way that you describe what
are the fish doing exactly and the the
answer is you don't know you have no
notion about it at all you have no
theory about it sure so your belief is
what's your belief exactly I think a
Christian might say something like my
belief is that I have no idea looking at
those fish what I would see in the
process of them being converted into
enough food for the 5,000 to eat I have
no idea what I would see but I do know
that what I would see is the fish end up
being spread amongst the 5,000 in the
same way like if I opened up the the
water jar what would I see when the
water became wine I have no idea does it
sort of blend from one color into
another does it suddenly snap does it
disappear and then reappear I don't know
but what I do know as a Christian is
that I would see
something at some event in which when I
look at the beginning it's water and
when I look at the end it's wine and I
mean actually I don't mean that Jesus
turning water into wine is some kind of
you know uh inextricably mythological
story and the question of whether it
happened sort of doesn't matter or maybe
it happened in a meta manner or maybe it
happened in a in a hyper reality sense I
I I would be as a Christian
ined more I'm more inclined rather than
to
believe I'm more inclined to understand
and then when I hit the limits of my
understanding I think I don't understand
that now do I believe it or not believe
it I think often especially with regards
to biblical matters let's say I'm I just
I have a suspension of belief and
disbelief yeah that's fine too I think
part of the reason that I've been able
to Be an Effective interpreter of the
biblical texts and a relatively
scientific interpreter is because I
approach the texts with respect the same
respect that I would approach a lab
animal it's like I don't know what this
is like I seriously don't know and I'm
not going to come at it with axiomatic
assumptions that are unquestionable I'm
going to try to see what's right in
front of my eyes I'm going to try to see
what mystery reveals itself if I take
this phenomenon seriously this is one of
the things that I find puzzling for
example about Dawkins because
Dawkins formulated the idea of meme
which is by by the way the same idea as
archetype it's exactly the same idea
except he just stopped it's like okay
there are memes they're selected for
okay selected on what basis exactly does
that mean there's a hierarchy of memes
are the memes more likely that are the
memes that are conserved more likely to
be what would you say viable organisms
and if they're viable organisms are they
microcosms this is really interesting in
in terms of the survivability because
there's a point I I've spoken to Richard
Dawkins well a a number of times but
twice on my podcast and the second time
somebody pointed out to me that there
might be a point of agreement between
you two that that has been overlooked
which is that I don't know if you've
ever come across the The evolutionary
argument against naturalism or the
argument from reason the idea that if
you're a materialist you can't trust
your your reasonable faculties so Alvin
planting have formulated this very well
very geniusly I think in saying that if
you believe that evolution by natural
selection happens materially what does
natural selection select for
survivability so if you're a materialist
that means that the very rational
faculty that you're using right now
evolves not to be sensitive to truth but
to survivability yes that's right and if
that's the case well why do you believe
in the truth of evolution well because
you've been rationally convinced of it
but the thing that you've just ascented
to the belief itself has just undercut
the process by which you that Bel
there's a whole the the the New England
pragmatists figured this out in like
1880 now I think this is a fascinating I
think it really is just a it is it's
exciting it's
that's for sure that's for sure it's
actually a point where Darwin and Newton
do not come together how do you mean
well the darwinian definition of true
and the Newtonian
definition so here's the thing here's
the thing you had a conversation with
Sam Harris you've had you've had a
number but one of them I don't think it
was a live event I think it was before
that you're talking about truth yeah and
awkward first second talk I had with him
I was it was extremely ill it do you
know it was awkward to listen to because
it felt very much like and I remember at
the time thinking you know what is this
this Jordan Peterson talking about like
truth is like darwinian truth is about
like survivability what what do you mean
truth is true true the way an arrow
flies yeah right and now I asked Richard
Dawkins about the evolutionary argument
against naturalism I said well well how
can you know that what you believe is
true and he said because believing true
things makes me more likely to survive
hey boy watch where you go with that at
the time but I thought to myself
afterwards it was one of my commenters
on on on patreon actually had had
mention he was listening to Rich and I
said but you know but okay maybe but
sometimes it's at least possible that
something that's false helps you to
survive you know the rustling in the
bushes believing that that's a lion
every time or tiger even if it's not
that helps you to survive because that
one time that it is you're still going
to run away and it costs you nothing to
run away when it's not a tiger so
believing it's a tiger even when it's
not is going to help me that's why we
have a negativity bias yeah and and and
D says well yeah of course there are
some circumstances where believing
something false could be beneficial to
survival and I said well how do you know
that 2 plus 2 equals 4 is not one of
those and it seemed as though he would
he he was just saying that believing
that would not be advantageous to our
survival which might well be true but if
that's the case then suddenly I'm
listening to what you're saying about uh
truth being more sort of darwinian and
related to survivability and I think
maybe you two would agree there and I
think well why is it that when you sit
down with Richard Dawkins you find it
difficult to have a conversation with
each other and and well I think it's
partly because we don't know each other
very well that's right and so and also
there are things he knows that I don't
know and there are things I know that he
doesn't know now I would say in my
defense that I what would you say I'm
more of aware aware of the things he
knows that I don't know than he is of
the things I know that he doesn't know
right so for example as far as I can
tell Dawkins doesn't know anything about
the yian tradition of literary
interpretation and that actually if
you're going to talk about religion
that's actually a fatal flaw right so
and you know he's called me for example
drunk on symbols it's like well the
imagination is a biological
function and it has a structure and a
purpose and it has its own logos its own
intelligible order and if you're not
aware of that order that doesn't make me
drunk on symbols it just means you don't
know what you're talking about now that
that that frustration that that you uh
appeal to there when you when you hear
Richard Dawkins um I think Terry
Eagleton said that listening to Dawkins
on theology is like listening to
somebody who write a book about biology
whose only knowledge of the subject is
having once read the Great British book
of birds and okay fair enough that but
that actually turns out to be a real
problem and it's a problem with regards
even to the meme idea because you don't
have to extend Dawkins work very far to
understand that religious stories are
memes sure right yeah well and and
there's a hierarchy of memes and some of
them are very functional but then here's
the thing like that frustration that
you're sort of throwing in that
direction I think people throw it throw
towards you and when when you say well
religion you don't have to look very far
to see that religion is a meme well
without further clarification and of
course this going to be it you can
understand why to to somebody first
listening that sounds almost atheistic
or religion is a meme no religion is not
religion is not a true historical
account of you know the the history of
the universe it's not a true historical
account it's a meme now it it when you
say that when you say that the
resurrection of Jesus well what does it
mean historically that the spirit of God
brooded upon the primordial Waters like
what does that mean historically no one
no one knows what me historically think
I don't think that at least most of
Genesis or parts of Genesis are supposed
to be I mean the the Bible is a is a is
a library right it's not a book and that
means that it's going to contain
different genres that's for sure and so
when when some of them are more
historically accurate and some of them
tilt more toward words that that kind of
elusive I don't mean elusive in the I
mean a l l i yeah sure right that that
Elusive and symbolic form that
characterizes Genesis one so because
there are different genres here it
depends on what story we're talking
about and I think what I often observe
you doing
is we might talk about uh
Christianity and if you aren't
comfortable committing to a historical
ideal you'll start talking about the the
spirit moving over the face of the
waters which is which is obviously a
much more mythological ideal um and not
not quite equivocating them but but
moving between them too quickly and and
not delineating them enough so if if I
asked you you know do you think that the
spirit moved across the face of the
waters and you said to me something like
I think it's still happening right what
I would say say hey fair enough yeah
that makes sense it always happens it
happened at the beginning of time and
it's always happening when somebody says
did The Exodus story happen did did the
did the Jews enslaved in Egypt Break
Free of their slavery and move to the
promised land across the desert for for
40 years did that happen MH you have
also said of The Exodus specifically
it's still happening yes now to me
that's far more inappropriate than
saying that the spirit is still moving
across the face of the waters because I
think what people mean there is do you
believe that these people in that time
period actually did this in such a way
that for instance might show up in an
archaeological report well I think that
I think that's the simple answer to that
is
probably sure and that's that's fine too
but then but we don't know I mean like
to the degree that there's been
archaeological investigations into the
kinds of biblical narratives that you've
described the archaeological evidence
tends to fall on the side of historical
accuracy in relationship to the Bible
quite surprisingly often clearly your
your I mean you you spent more time in
Exodus than probably any person I've
ever met in person right clear the story
sort of captivates you and you think
it's really important and and and can a
lot of course it's infinitely deep story
I think most people speaking to you
already know that you think that right
and so when they ask you a question when
when they suddenly say to you but do you
think it really happened well what the
hell does that mean you you you must
know that what they mean is what I was
talking about a second ago which is that
sort of um what what okay so fine so
it's easy just to turn this around it's
like okay what exactly happened in in
your historic account when Moses
encountered the burning bush I don't
need to know exactly what happened what
I need to know is I'm not asking you
specifically or attacking you for that
what I need to know is that if I sort
of went to the Egyptian
desert at sort of the time that this
story is alleged to have take taken
place in history would I see a mass
movement of Israelites from Egypt into
the promised land would I see people
with feet walking through the desert
leaving foot well let's let's let's take
it part rationally so but you also
understand that when when someone's
asking that and you want like even if
you don't like the question you must
understand what someone's
asking understand many of the things
that they're doing simultaneously you
must also understand that when you then
say it's still happening yeah people
just go what are you talking about yeah
well I would say that's not my
problem but it's it's it becomes a
problem when you understand that
someone's asking a quite benile
historical question yeah but you don't
get to do that but why not because the
stories that you're dealing with aren't
banel I agree but like uh one so you
can't reduce them to something B even if
it's even if it's what would you call it
even if it's reassuring this actually
happened it's well then what do you do
with the burning bush this actually
happened one comparison I would make is
um between this and talking about
Fiction more broadly yeah right well you
got it right earlier you know I would
say you KN you noted that the the the
stories in the in in the in the biblical
Library leap across genres right well we
know this because sometimes they're
poetry and sometimes s yeah exactly so
so in any given story there's going to
be historical account plus mythological
overlay and you know you have to be a
discriminating reader to kind of see
what's different and you don't just get
to say well all the mythological
symbolism is historical reality it's
like no it's not but here's the thing
for example so like take take a piece of
trivial fiction like Forest Gump yeah
right we say like okay did that happen
now I I think that what you probably say
is something like well I don't think the
events literally occurred but I think
that they obviously get at something
that's sort of perennially true about
human nature suppose I said they
happened they existed as a pattern but
there's a but there's a scene in Forest
Gump when you know he I think he meets
the president is it JFK at the time I
think he goes and meets John F Kennedy
yeah and so I said to you well well is
is JFK the the like that part of that
specific part of that story is it is it
true that JFK was the president
right and you would probably just say
yeah yeah you you wouldn't say anything
more complicated and even though the
subject as a whole of like is Forest
Gump true is Hamlet true that's a
complicated question very but
specifically when I say ah but
interestingly there's this there's this
there's this little point I want to make
in this board of discussion do you think
that that JFK was actually the president
you would say yes why do you think it
matters to people like I don't know
these are ancient accounts let's say may
that's the biggest problem maybe that's
the biggest problem that that you have
with the people who were asking these it
is why what what point are you trying to
make here the point is I know what the
point usually is is the people who are
asking the question believe that true in
uniring means objectively happened in
history like the things that we're
seeing right now happen yeah it's like
well no that's not how that's that's
what not what those stories are like for
me some of it is but for a Christian
when asking you that it's probably
because for them they have an
understanding of Christianity that
requires believing in that kind of Truth
for me and the reason why I hope that
like me asking these questions will be
less frustrating to you is because I
have no desire for that I I don't care
about that I'm genuinely just interested
in what you think and so my my my desire
to know whether you think Exodus
historically happened goes no further
than a point of interest about your
beliefs so there's there's elements of
the especially the setup to The Exodus
story that strike me as very very
plausible historically so for
example the the Jews before the Pharaoh
of that time were under the guidance and
protection of Joseph and the previous
pharaoh and they regarded the Israelites
as benefactors because they had Joseph
had helped save the kingdom and his
people were welcome but that was
forgotten and so the new pharaoh and the
new Egyptians regard
the appallingly successful Jews
as destructive Interlopers and they make
them slaves it's like well can you
believe that it happens all the time
it's happening right now so it's very in
this particular case saying it's very
plausible it's like saying something
like well yeah it could have happened I
don't
know well I I don't know I don't think
anybody knows so when somebody asks did
The Exodus really happen that that word
really when they say if I really is the
is the if I said did The Exodus happen
and and I'd understand why you would
then say well youve got to understand
what kind of story this is fine but then
if somebody says yeah but did it really
happen which parts of it even if they're
not expressing it very well like what
they're getting at there is they're
trying to emphasize the the historicity
they're trying to say but did it
historically happen probably is what
they mean by the word really there right
but but the thing is it speaks of their
see they have a the problem is is that
Christians who ask that have a
metaphysics that's not Christian MH so
it's it's a nonstarter the question it's
like you're asking me the question yeah
a materialist atheist would ask and and
you want me to give you an answer that
bolsters your faith but the presumptions
of your question are Enlightenment
atheistic so it's like I don't know how
to play that game so do you think that
to be a Christian you don't need to
believe in the historicity of The Exodus
or the resurrection of Jesus for example
well I think those are separate issues
actually okay yeah that's that's
probably right as well and interesting
you know I I spent uh last night is a
bit of a time delay so it feels like
longer but last night I was having a
conversation with a with a friend of
mine I said you know I'm speaking to
Jordan Peterson tomorrow I was thinking
how can I prepare for this and we ended
up my friend Sheen's his name we ended
up having a conversation about whether
whether Hamlet is real right and that
was probably better preparation than
anything else I could have done what I
realiz question so take so take if
somebody asks you know was Hamlet a real
person sort of naively I say have you
heard the story oh no is that is that a
real person I would say no however there
is a sense in which and I'm trying to
understand what you're saying here there
is a sense in which there are a lot of
characters infinitely many characters
that Shakespeare never wrote about yeah
right those characters seem to exist
less than Hamlet does yeah even if
Hamlet exists less than Jordan p and
Alex oon do in the in Hamlet might exist
more than than me me and you well okay
one of the things you one of the things
you okay one of the things you pointed
to in the analysis that you did of a
talk I had with Jonathan Paso is my uh
somewhat tongue and cheet comment that
God is the ultimate fictional character
yes right which I think is a hilarious
line by the way yeah but which by the
way I think I misunderstood now now that
I've I've watching that back that's
that's the thing I say I think I might
have misunderstood and maybe that's what
you about to tell me I should interrupt
let's walk through that yeah because
people see and this is part of this
underlying materialist atheist
Enlightenment ethos people think that
fiction and fact are opposites it's like
no they're not okay not at all okay so
so let's let's let's use an analogy to
begin with what's more real things or
numbers okay now I'm not going to make a
case for either of those positions I'm
just saying that's an actual question
yeah you talk to mathematicians they
think well numbers are way more real
than things things are Evan they
disappear they Flash in and out of
existence numbers are permanent and then
you could you could think about it
biologically it's like
well how useful is numeracy to survival
like very right when when when you
become numerate you're powerful in a way
that the mere grip you have on the
individual facts doesn't afford at all
so there are forms of abstraction that
are clearly more real than the things
from which they're abstracted or at
least as real I would say more real CU
they're so powerful well fiction is an
abstraction sure right and so Hamlet did
Hamlet exist it's like Hamlet is the
pattern of character that existed in
multiple people over a very long period
of time and so Hamlet is an abstraction
like raskolnikov in crime and punishment
did raskolnikov exist it's like
raskolnikov existed in the soul of every
Russian from like 1850 to 1990 right and
so is it real it's like it's hyper real
yeah fiction is hyper real it's a meta
truth as you put exct now is that is
that real well well when someone says is
that if they've listened to what you've
just said and understood it then if they
still ask the question but is it real
you must understand that what they mean
is like you know did like did a woman
did aliona Ivanova get hit in the head
with an axe right like yes or did that
happen and and and again you could still
resort to saying saying you know it it
happened in the heart of every Russian
who's ever thought about to that
specific no right no is the answer and
so and we we can say no with confidence
because we know that that that Doki sort
of thought this up yeah with something
like the Egyptians walking through the
desert we can't as confidently say
something like no that didn't happen but
we we'd have to be more more uh humble
in saying something like I don't know
but the the comparison I made in this
video I I put two two questions side by
side you were you were asked by Douglas
Murray you know
uh did did risol noop exist and you say
well well I think that the the events
literally didn't happen but that kind of
Misses something and there's something
more to talk about and then you asked
you know the pattern is extremely real
sure then you asked about Kan and Abel
you know the story of Kan and Abel
happen like a famous you know the
question did that happen you know begs
the question if you've got it you've got
to cons and you sort of in a way that it
seems strange to me that the ease with
which you were able to say of of
raskolnikov and DKI well no that didn't
l happen of course but you've got to
understand that there's another sense in
which we've got to talk about the truth
of the story well the kable story is is
quite complex CU you could you could
imagine easily
that there was a fratricide at some
point in the past that was of sufficient
emotional magnitude to have stories
aggregate around it to have an account
agregate around it so it's easiest to
presume that there for because why not
it's perfectly plausible that a
primordial murder of that sort happened
in the memory of that tribal people and
was represented in that manner now it as
the account and ilad has done a very
good job of pointing out how this
develops too you could think of iot's
work on the mythologization of stories
as an extension of Dawkins idea of the
meme because ilad discusses in great
detail how an
account mutates
to what would you say to be maximally
memorable across time so it mutates you
can take there was a core that's true
let's say in that in the narrow
historical sense but the account mutates
to be optimally adapted to the structure
of memory that characterizes the humany
and that comes out in story like like
the story right right and you get a
maximally memorable story now that's a
meme is it
true that's hard question because you
see I think Kan and abble probably
belongs more on the sort of brooding
over the face of the waters category
than it does exodus category for example
like so I I I I think we well there's
very little detail in it that would make
it a specific historical event right I
mean because it's it's two generic
brothers and there's a generic murder
but but it's it's interesting too
because even in the case of a specific
fratricide let's say that actually
happens in the world well there's all
sorts of principalities involved in the
background right so for example I spent
a lot of time looking at Dylan Cable's
accounting of his mental state before
shooting up the Coline High School yeah
well you know if you read
that it'll make your blood run cold he's
obviously possessed whatever that means
whatever that means things he happy to
accept the word possessed um well look
what he did KN knowing in Part I don't
take this wrong way knowing that I'm
speaking with you I I'm not going to
take that as as literally as as I would
if I was speaking to yeah well lit is a
very hard thing in a circumstance like
that because invited something in and it
wasn't pleasant and it had its way with
him right and the and the the results
although Dreadful were nowhere near as
Dreadful as he was hoping they would be
right it's dark and Is that real so what
happened there it's like well one way of
describing it is that you know a
alienated young man shot up a high
school another way of representing it
which may be more true is that it was
another what would you say punctuated
episode of a cosmic drama that's been
going on
forever it isn't obvious to me at all
which of those two accounts is more real
well depend depends on what specific
questions being asked for example right
now now suppose that you were a witness
to this crime and the police pull you
into questioning as a witness yeah and
they say we we're trying to ga
information to try and you know catch
the suspects suppose that there's no
suicide involved you know the the
suspects at large they're trying to get
your help and they say so so so Dr peton
what happened and you say well I think
what happened was the continuation uh
sort of a punctuation in in the long
paragraph of of the cosmic drama that is
our human existence and was so that's
not what we meant okay but like come on
help me out here man like like really
like and I think that's that's doing
with the Rel question well that's a
level of analysis so we went back when
when when we started this discussion you
talked about the infinite regress for
purposes for writing an essay right so
what are you doing when you're writing
an essay well you're making horizontal
and curved marks with a pen sure right
well right so but but there is a a
cosmic tree of events in every micro
event right and when when
people when when they're looking for
eyewitness testimony they're asking you
for something like the highest possible
level of narrow resolution you can
manage in Miguel Chris just uh yeah
right well I I just spoke with him and
unfortunately I think we lost about half
of the footage so I'm not sure how how
much that will that will be seen in the
world but but he he brought to my
attention I'm sure he said it was John
Ruskin who talked about having a you you
see in the in the garden you see like a
a square and you think it's a you think
it's like a white square in the garden
inexplicably and then you go a bit
closer and you see it's it's actually a
page it's a book and then you look a bit
closer and you see it's got words on it
then you a microscope and you see
actually it's got like ridges yeah you
know and then you go a bit closer and
you actually see atoms bumping into each
other and you go a bit closer and you
see sort of waves and energy right and
he sort of like well which of those is
the real thing you
saw did you know a baby's heart begins
to beat at just 3 weeks at 5 weeks that
heartbeat can be heard on ultrasound and
this can sometimes be their only defense
in the womb that's where pre-born steps
in pre-born rescues 200 babies every day
from abortion simply by providing
mothers with an ultrasound after hearing
her child's heartbeat and seeing its
perfectly formed body in the womb she's
twice as likely to choose Life by 6
weeks the baby's eyes are forming by 10
weeks a baby's able to suck his or her
thumb pre-born needs our help to save
these precious lives for just $28 you
could be the difference between the life
or death of a child and if you become a
monthly sponsor you'll receive stories
and ultrasound pictures of the lives you
helped save
all gifts are tax deductible and 100% of
your donation goes towards saving babies
to donate dial pound 250 and say the
keyword baby that's pound 250 baby or go
to pre-born
docomo that's preborn
[Music]
docomo right well and the thing is is
that that hierarchy that you just
describe this is the cosmic tree of life
this is idril it's like you have got the
quantum level and the atomic level and
the molecular level and so forth up to
the phenomenal level that's not where it
stops I started understand this when I
was thinking something very peculiar
this is decades ago thought people will
go to a museum to look at Elvis
Presley's guitar yeah it's like what the
hell are they doing so you can imagine
that you have a a display case and you
have Elvis's guitar in it and now you
take that guitar out let's say it's a
mass-produced guitar just for the sake
of argument you replace it with a
identical model from the same year yep
okay now is that Elvis's guitar and
people will say and you can think this
so strange people would say well even if
I couldn't tell the difference I would
rather look at Elvis's guitar yeah and
then you think well what is that some
kind of delusion like what the hell's
going on here no the answer is this is
what du shamp was on about when he think
it was du shamp who put the Ural in the
art gallery it's right what he was
pointing to and it was brilliant was
that
much of what we perceive as concretely
real is actually dependent on a
hierarchical context that isn't part of
the apprehension of the object so when
you go to see Elvis's guitar yeah in a
museum the perception is informed by the
context it's like well you're an Elvis
fan and you know a lot about Elvis
history and you know that this is
Elvis's town and the object itself
partakes in that higher order Unity
that's the unity that extends off to
Heaven every object partakes in that
embeddedness above like for the
reductionist types you'd say well what's
this made of right it's like well it's
it's molecules and then it's atoms and
then it's like Quantum Quantum uh
whatever the hell exists down in the
quantum level that's what this is made
of it's like wait a second it's on this
table it's in this room it's of this
time that's all this thing
you know and that's that's that's the
higher order conceptualization but it's
just as much part of the object yeah and
and the a reductionist view doesn't take
that into account and that's a big
problem I think it's true that you know
looking at ruskin's book piece of paper
it would be silly to always say well
what's that in the garden over there oh
it's a bunch of atoms bumping into each
other right that would be ludicrous well
that's also so back to our discussion of
darwinian utility it's like well it's
the wrong level of functional analysis
surely it would also be inappropriate to
do the opposite that is like to always
to always think at a higher resolution
than people are obviously sort of
practically trying to so for example if
I was close enough to see and I was
interested in in what paper is made of
and I said what is this and someone said
oh it's a white square in the garden
yeah so well that's inappropriate you've
gone to focus down right and I feel like
what where you might criticize the
reductionist materialist for going to
for going to too high a resolution
thought too narrow you go too wide on
issues of uh religious historicity well
you you want to hit the target squarely
right and that's hard so in The Sermon
on the Mount Christ addresses that to
some degree so his injunction for paying
attention properly takes local and
distal into account simultaneously he
says okay this is what you have to do
first of
all you Orient yourself so this is the
highest level of or orientation right so
this is the Divine orientation it's the
thing at the top of Jacob's Ladder it's
the value at the Pinnacle of the value
hierarchy you put what's properly
highest first and foremost in the
theater of your imagination right and
then you align that with the belief that
other people have the same intrinsic
value as you and that are a reflection
of that infinite value you start there
then you pay attention to the moment yes
right to TL sto wrote about this in his
confession he sort of he was he was I I
love it it's like 100 pages long you can
you can read it in noted yeah it's a
great book this wonderful uh account of
of essentially him sort of trying to
battle with his his reason and his faith
and he eventually concludes that he was
looking in the wrong place he was
looking amongst intellectuals and he
found that he he he looked I think he
sort of he quite dismissively call like
the simple people you just your everyday
person working man and he found that it
was something about sort of you know if
you if you take someone who's who's
starving and you bring him and you tell
him to sort of take this metal pump and
just pump it up and down and don't tell
him why and he does it then the water
starts flowing it's like you have to
actually do the thing you have to live
out the thing and then you get to see
why it's why why it works um so it's you
know I I I understand that I think
that's that's probably that's probably
true he also says toll story that is in
that in that same account that he found
that the there was a there was a an
exactly inverse
correlation between the specificity of
an answer
and like the importance of the
question I can tell you exactly how many
molecules are in that glass of water but
who cares right it's not relevant and
the more the question becomes about you
know Humanity human life the important
stuff the less specific the answer
necessarily has to become so I
understand there is a there is a you so
so you you you've you've alluded there
to or or indicated the relevance of
value for perception right you nailed it
with that observation because as you
pointed out any phenomena can be
analyzed at a multitude multiple levels
of of of the hierarchy that it exists
within okay so what makes the choice of
level of analysis appropriate well it's
something like it is something that's
akin to darwinian utility it's something
like that you you can think about it
less abstractly is that you want the the
level of resolution that gives you
maximal functional grip in relationship
to your Pursuit AB okay so what's your
Pursuit well two questions what is your
Pursuit and what should your Pursuit be
well your Pursuits necessarily nested
inside a hierarchy of Pursuits and when
I said that God is
the what would you say the ultimate
Pursuit that sits at the apex of the
progression of Pursuits that is Jacob's
Ladder that's what that's indicating in
that vision is that every Every Act of
perception unites Earth and Heaven Y
and the perception
itself is invisibly dependent on
whatever it is you're worshiping like
here's one problem right because I I I
think I see what you're saying and I
hope you know what I tried to do in in
making that that that video essay about
your religious views and uh I I suppose
I wasn't the main thing I was trying to
do was sort of offer an interpretation
trying to get to grips within and I I
hope that you feel as though at least
I'm I'm making an effort here to
defitely to really try and try and get
what you're thinking at um one problem
is that you know in the early
church there was a debate around the
physicality of Jesus's resurrection yes
so the canonical tradition ends up uh
stipulating that Jesus physically
resurrects and you must believe that
otherwise you're her and that's part of
the EMP the Catholic particular emphasis
on the Divinity of the body which has a
real wisdom rather than a disembodied
Soul you're also you also have like the
nostic tradition the broadly speaking
the Gnostic tradition in early
Christianity that's so popular that
valentinus nearly valentinus nearly
becomes the bishop of Rome he's nearly
the pope you know and um there's I I I
talked about this the other day and I
should have looked it up I can't
remember which Church Father it was that
was was telling the the church Community
the early Church community when you go
to a new place don't ask to be taken to
the Christian church are to be taken to
the Catholic church because otherwise
you might end up in a gnostic Church it
so popular right right and a lot of the
Gnostic
tradition says that the thing that
that's being gten wrong is the idea that
there was this literal Resurrection
right no no the kingdom of God is here
and now the resurrection is inside of
you and you you attain it through nosis
I mean the Gospel of Thomas which is
probably the most famous non-canonical
gospel and could have been written um at
the same time as like the Gospel of John
this is early text doesn't even mention
the resurrection doesn't of crucifix
it's a list of sayings yeah and the the
very form of that book as as one scholar
whose name I've forgotten unfortunately
has pointed
out of that of that collection shows
that these people believed that the
thing that's important is not what Jesus
did but what he said the thing that's
important is the knowledge the thing
that's important and so so this
Resurrection stuff sort of doesn't
matter now the thing is in that early
Church
community somebody who said well this
question of like the resurrection as a
physical you know historical event that
you're kind of missing the point the
thing that matters is like you know the
resurrection that takes place inside of
every person yeah it sort of sounds a
little bit like the kind of approach
that you would take now if that's true
that would mean that in the early church
you'd have been condemned as a heretic
so so when a modern Catholic says to you
you know Jordan Peterson are you a
Christian you know what do you think
about Catholicism um I think that the
reason that they're interested is
because if it's true what I'm saying
then they would have to say oh I suppose
at least according to my understanding
of Catholic that's a of count you number
so I think that's probably why people
are interested and I wonder if well
that's a gen that's a that what would
you say that would constitute a genuine
form of inquiry for sure and I wonder if
you feel like you're I mean I don't know
I mean see one of the things I really
like about the the the the the the
bodily tradition of the Resurrection is
that it see what it does That's So
remarkable is that it doesn't
desacralize the body
that's very very important you know the
the I think the fundamental problem with
gnosticism is that it becomes a it's
very easy for it to become a Doctrine
that's contemptuous of the body and
contemptuous of the of the material
world great deal of the nostic tradition
literally believes that the material
world is created by an evil Dem right
exactly well exactly exactly exactly
Jesus to save us the insistence on the
bodily Resurrection is a medication
against that and it's an effective one I
I would really love to ask uh about
Genesis this might be a bit of a tangent
and tell me if if it's if it's
uninteresting to you but there's one
Gnostic text call called the testimony
of truth that was discovered in the
nakadi library and this is buried
probably around 300 ad so it must be
earlier than that it's a fairly early
text and this text identifies the
serpent in the Garden of Eden with
Christ and this is fascinating to me
because when I when I read as a leader
to illumination
yes tradition that makes the serpent a
higher God than the original God because
he's the agent that calls to conscience
yeah now of course Ser yes now the
serpent doesn't is never identified as
as Satan or the devil except by except
by Christian tradition it's just the
serpent now there's so much interesting
about this when I when I first read the
the the Genesis what when I well even
the classic Christians often regarded
the
fall as the what would you say faithful
but
Heaven Sent error that made the
Incarnation of Christ both possible and
right so there there's it's very
interesting because there's a gloss on
that where even in traditional
Christianity the becomes that's right
yeah it gives you Christ and and Jesus
so Point can Compares himself to a
serpent in the Gospel of John you know
um early in early yes you he'll lifted
up likees up the insanely Prof see
that's one of the passages actually
sorry I don't want to derail you from
your tangent but um that's one of the
passages that I've concentrated a lot in
this new book that I've just finished uh
uh we who wrestle with God because that
equation that Christ manages with his I
identification with the serpent in the
desert that is so stunningly brilliant
that I cannot possibly
imagine how anyone could have thought it
up it's to to to identify him with the
source of the
poison that to gaze upon what would you
say redeemed the Israelites in the
desert it's so there's so much in that
that it's it's it's it's really a kind
of miracle that serpent on the Stak
that's sleepus it's the same symbol yeah
so that just in itself is something
stunning there is something there is
something amazing that I think of well
obviously I'm not going to go as far as
saying that I can't imagine that was
thought up maybe not by somebody it's
complicated with the Bible of course um
and there's a lot to say there I mean I
mean the author of The Gospel of John is
obviously a sort of theological genius
in the way that the authors of the
synoptic gospels at least weren't as
much um so you know it's it's it's
believable to me that that that that
could be the case but but besides the
point um because that would that that's
another complicated thing to talk about
but when I first I I it wasn't the first
time but the first time I really tried
to read the the Genesis account of the
garden of be and I was doing it in the
service of sort of producing a video I
was I want to make sure I want to
revisit the story make sure I sort of
understand it properly um I I'm reading
this
text and God says You must you you can
eat of any of the any of the trees but
not the tree of the knowledge of Good
and Evil and immediately you think to
yourself why not you know why why
wouldn't and some people like to say oh
it's because that's actually by eating
of the tree of the knowledge of Good and
Evil you get to dictate morality doesn't
read like that to me it reads to me like
knowledge of Good and Evil let's just
take it at face value to to start with
it's like why not God why not well we're
not told but don't do it because in the
day that you eat of it you shall surely
die yeah now the serpent comes along and
the serpent is described as more cunning
than any of the animals that God God
created yeah um I don't speak Hebrew
unfortunately but where it says you know
for example more more cunning than any
of the the the beasts that God had
created that could mean of all of the
beasts that he created or more cunning
than the beasts that he had created
almost as if this is a a being in in the
garden that that God himself didn't
actually create or God isn't sort of
connected to in the same way because why
is the serpent there in the first place
is a question that's worth asking you
know okay that's for sure so you have
the serpent and and that word cunning I
thought to myself what does that mean so
I so I I looked it up and it's it's the
word like arum or arum I don't know how
to pronounce it but I looked elsewhere
in the Old Testament and it's used in a
few different ways you know it means
cunning it means subtle subtle yeah
throughout Proverbs it's used to it's
used consistently to mean sensible mhm
what do I mean
prudent and so there's one reading of
this you know now now the serpent was
more sensible than any of the other
Beasts of the Garden of Eden and he
comes to Eve and says did God say that
if you eat of that tree you'll surely
die and she says yeah that's what he
said and he says you will not surely die
in the day that you eat thereof you'll
just God just knows you'll become like
him knowing good and evil and he doesn't
want that so Eve looks at the fruit and
she eats the fruit and does she die in
the day thereof well again a complicated
question but on face value no she
doesn't die she gives them to Adam he
doesn't die and what does happen well
God says to them or God says now they
have become like us knowing good and
evil they must be banished from the
garden so they do not Outreach
outstretch their hand and and and eat
from the Tree of Life So it seems to me
that you've got this serpent who could
plausibly be described as the most
sensible of the animals telling Eve
immen the people the people who regard
Milton Satan as what an admirable
revolutionary tend to have the same
attitude towards the serpent in the
garden and it's a complicated it's a
very complicated issue because even to
the degree that the serpent is an agent
of Lucifer which I think is an
extraordinarily
profound what reading and overlay on
that initial story I think it's
remarkable Lucifer is the bringer of
light right the spirit of Jesus himself
is referred to as Lucifer at one point
in in the in the gospel which is which
is quite a fascinating uh well side not
I guess the question is like
illumination to what end I I do think
that the interpretation that you
rejected um with regard to the
consumption of the fruit of the
knowledge of the tree of Good and Evil
is moral presumption it's the sin that
nche suggests to everyone as the
medication for the death of God we have
to Define our own values it's like no we
can't but it's knowledge of good you
know yeah but it but it's it's it's more
than that it's it's the it's the
consumption of the essence of moral
knowledge itself it sounds to me that
like I I can never you know contradict
ex aesus sure like that that might may
be the case but if I if I read this text
naturally if I just say well like how
does this naturally read to me yeah it
reads to me like you have and when I
that's why I brought it up because you
consider this Gnostic tradition right
the evil demiurgic creator of the
universe and like you have and and and
the author of The testimony of truth
says you know what God is this what God
is this that that that firstly you know
condemns man for wanting to eat of the
tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil
and secondly lies to him about what's
going to happen when he does and and
recognizes and and we're missing like
50% of the text like it's it's ripped to
ripped to shred these Gnostic texts it's
fascinating I think the the Gospel of
Judas spent about 30 years in a safety
deposit box in New York City and nearly
destroyed the whole thing it's
fascinating story but so we don't know
for sure but there's a point where it
seems to identify this this serpent with
with with Christ with Jesus
and reading that I'm like that that
makes makes a lot of sense to me on on a
Surface ref the ambivalence about the
human rise to
self-consciousness right is that a good
or is that something good or something
evil because why does God then say now
they've become like us knowing good and
evil they must not be allowed we must
banish them lest they reach out their
hand and and and eat from the Tree of
Life yeah and sort of then guards Eden
with the with the sherban with the with
the Flaming sword like it seems that God
is saying you know because because we're
told that because of the fool now man
can't inherit eternal life and Jesus
must come to must come to save him but
as soon as they eat of this tree God
banishes them they don't they don't God
banishes them I don't have an
interpreted problem with that part yeah
that that's I don't know what sense to
make of that I should ask Jonathan Paso
because I suspect he'd have something to
say about that yeah I think that
the one way of interpreting the account
of the Fall is that it was the
inevitable consequence of Adam and Eve's
overreach sure and so they end up
banished not so much because God wants
them out of the garden but because
they're in their pride they threw
themselves out of the garden in their
overreach and I wrote about this it's
very hard for me to generate the entire
interpretation on the Fly I wrote about
this extensively in this new book that
I'm publishing in November trying to
take apart that particular issue because
I what what seems to happen in in the
Adam and Eve account is that you have
you have an illusion to the function of
male and female Consciousness first you
have Adam who names and subdus and
orders right so he's an extension in
some ways of the logos right in in human
form and God's curious enough about that
to bring everything to Adam to just see
what he'll name yeah but the command is
for Adam to put everything in its proper
place in this hierarchical organization
with its proper name and Adam can do
that if he's the an adequate and
faithful reflection of the logos then
Eve is created as the counterpart to
that and it's something
like well there's an ordering tendency
and there's the order that that produces
but then there are things that are on
the margin that aren't accounted for by
the divine order and they need a voice
and Eve is the voice
of you think about this
biologically what does a woman do in the
context of a family she brings the
attention to that which is vulnerable
and has not yet been properly
Incorporated so well what do you what do
you mean by
that well imagine that you have a
well-constituted family and there's a
new baby M well the baby doesn't fit in
mhm the baby is an anomaly the baby is
an individual that has its own
idiosyncrasies and the mother who's
sensitive to the needs of the infant
she's going to be the voice of that
she's going to knock on the door of the
ordering principle and say you need to
make some adjustments here so that what
can't fit does if it feels because yeah
and again I I I'm trying to be to who
understand what you're saying and trying
to be charitable it does seem to me that
this
is an unnatural
interpretation uh in that sort
of it seems like maybe it's it's too
much like I I don't know that's that's
you can make that work right you can
make that work but there's always this
is this is the kind of objection that
Sam Harris had to the sorts of things
that I said he said well you can
interpret a cookbook that way exactly
yeah well and this is look this is a
huge problem this is the problem the
postmodernists dangled in front of
everyone it's like well what's the
canonical interpretation of a text the
answer is no one knows right and so does
that mean that there's an infinite
number of interpretations per text yes
which one's correct hey now that problem
I think to some degree has actually been
technically solved while the large
language models do this okay you bet so
so I've been talking to one of my
colleagues about a new discipline which
is something like computational
epistemology well because the the large
language models track patterns of inter
relationships between words okay so when
you're trying to interpret something
like the story of Adam and Eve the the
story is the words the story is the
letters the story is the words the story
is the phrases the story is the
sentences and the paragraphs and the
chapters and the whole biblical Corpus
plus the entire bloody culture and all
of that bears on those interpretation so
you say well am I overreaching my
interpretation in relationship to Adam
and Eve and I would say well that that's
a very difficult question and it's
possible to overreach and it's possible
to over interpret I mean specifically
with with the with the female in the
family well the thing is though that
that that there I mean could any other
person like having not listened to this
conversation and not and not spoken to
dsts would know that but any other
person in in the world sort of read the
story of Adam and Eve and similarly say
well I think that this is because is
representing what a woman does in a well
oriented family which has to do with you
know when you have a child it's sort of
a it's an anomaly it's something
something new and and it's the woman
that brings well that's Eve Eve stands
for the voice of the
serpent the thing that's excluded that's
true but but that's that's exactly the
point is that that's exact so would
would someone else come to that
conclusion um I would
say well people can make that decision
for themselves when they read the text
but I would say it's very much keeping
let's say with DST interpretations of
what masculine and feminine are it's not
it's not an infallible way to understand
uh whether an interpretation is correct
but I think it's helpful to know if if
you read a novel there's that there that
sort of joke that school children make
about like doesn't matter what a novel
says it'll be like the curtains were
blue and and the English Je will say
well let's unpack that let's look at
what that means right and and people
make fun of that because they that's
their experience in school yeah I I
think that one way to understand if
we're doing this appropriately is if two
people simultaneously think oh actually
the fact that the curtains were blue is
significant here if you consider this so
it seems to point to that if if people
can independently even if they don't get
it quite the same recognize it that's
sign well it's helpful to understand
that there's something yes definitely
legitimate about that kind of definitely
this is actually part of the reason that
I was so became so interested in the
union ilad Eric neyman School of
mythological interpretation because
that's exactly what they did was they
took patterns of interpretation let's
say of masculine and feminine from
multiple cultures and looked for overlap
yeah okay when I wrote maps of meaning
so I did that I used the union Works in
that regard but I also used what I knew
about neuros pychology and
neuropsychopharmacology with the
presumption being that if all of these
pointers pointed to the same thing it
was probably there that's multi method
multi trait construct validation
fundamentally and the notion is the your
senses do the same thing if your eyes
and your ears and your sense of smell
and your taste and your touch all report
the same thing then you have a
reasonable probability of assuming of
surviving if you assume that it's true
now that's not perfect because the
reason we talk is that I don't want to
just rely on my own senses even though
there's five of them so I've got a a
quint angulation happening which is a
pretty decent way of specifying truth I
want to know if you if your perception
shows concordance right we want this
converging evidence now it's trickier
with textual interpretation you know
partly it's trickier too because mere
consensus is not sufficient you need you
need deep expertise okay so why would I
say that well we have these large
language models for example and they're
doing statistical analysis of textual
inter relationship at every level right
billions of parameters so the letter
conjunctions the word conjunctions the
phrase conjunctions the sentence
conjunctions the whole bloody thing but
even there prone to go astray and the
reason for that is that they're
overweighted to the present like so we
have the alignment problem as a
consequence which is well how do we
trust the AI interpretations well the
same problem obtains for human beings
the alignment problem how do we align
ourselves well that's what a classical
education did right and that was
steeping in the ancient texts why
because the ancient texts are
distillations of patterns that have
existed over thousand thousands of years
and if you know the patterns you Orient
yourself properly and that also makes
you immune to see the problem with the
convergence notion is it can produce a
False Consensus like every all the Nazis
agreed well that's a problem because
they were wrong you think we should be
sending chat gbt to Bible School
absolutely absolutely while we've been I
have a colleague we've been training AI
systems on classic texts they're way
more useful I use one all the time we
haven't released it how how is it more
use
like it's not
woke seriously it's not ideologically ad
but but surely it is it's I mean it's
it's it's ideologically
um it's it's ideologically controlled
and confined just in a different way no
I don't think it's ideologically conf
ideology typical post ideology doesn't
need to be bad especially given that
like as as a non-believer in
Christianity I see Christianity as an
ideology right that's a good objection
this goes go back to the point that you
made this goes back to the point you
made about people taking the right to
themselves to define the moral order
let's say in the Garden of Eden okay so
what's the problem with that the problem
is is that the proper interpretation is
bounded by the actuality of the cosmic
order right so it isn't the
postmodernist say well it's just one
ideology it's either this one or this
one and but then that's all grounded in
power as it turns out so they got
something at the bloody Pinnacle anyways
that that that that philosophy either
degenerates into a kind of incoherent
nism or it turns into a power play it's
like no there are canonical
interpretations well what are they well
that's what's encapsulated in the
religious text is canonical
interpretations okay why are they
canonical okay I'll give you an example
you tell me what you think about this is
good this is a good rejoiner to D to
Dawan selfish J right okay
so God is Con calized in the story of
Abraham as the Call to Adventure yeah
okay so Abraham is privileged he's Rich
he's in a state of infantile security he
doesn't have to do a damn thing till
he's like 70 his Rich parents he doesn't
have to lift a finger okay and then a
voice comes to him that says get the
hell away from your zone of comfort
leave your family leave your tent leave
your community go out in the world okay
well so what is that well that's the
same impulse that drives a child to
develop it's the impulse that drives a a
man to continue to mature right so you
can think about it as an instinct if you
want the instinct to growth okay God
makes Abraham a deal it's it's such a
stellar deal he says look if you listen
to this voice of Adventure if you commit
to it if you live by its dictates and
you make the proper sacrifices along the
way this is what will happen to you
you'll be a blessing to yourself okay so
that's a good deal that's a nice start
right so you don't have to be miserable
and self-conscious right aware of your
own nakedness you can start to walk with
God again okay but more you'll do that
in a way that will ensure your valid
reputation so that's a good deal because
you want to have a reputation that's
distributed in the social Community
obviously and if it's based on something
real so much the better then you're not
a charlatan or a fake or a psychopath
okay but that's not all he said you'll
do that in a way that will enable you to
establish a permanent Dynasty that will
Cascade down the generations and that's
not all either you'll do all that in a
way that's beneficial to everyone else
so this is so cool because it speaks of
it's something like the tree of life it
speaks of a concordance right between
the instinct to mature and develop this
that calling of Adventure the pathway
that actually works best for you the
pathway that works best for you and
establishes something permanent in a
manner that enhances your reputation
that Cascades down the generations okay
now Abraham is offered if he follows
this pathway God says well you'll be the
father of Nations okay so imagine
this this is Contra the selfish Gene
let's say the human pattern of
reproduction Dawkins mistake was that he
thought reproduction and sex were the
same thing and they're not they're not
especially not in the human case because
human beings are high investment
long-term maters right sure so we have
very few Offspring and we invest like
Matt in them parir Bond you live long
enough to be grandparents you put a
multi okay so that means that to be the
proper father you have to act out a
sacrificial ethos okay the the idea in
the story of Abraham is that if you act
out that sacrificial e thought properly
which aligns the spirit of adventure
with the harmony of the community you
will act in a manner that best ensures
the long-term survival of your Offspring
right so you can imagine it's not just
the contribution of sperm to egg it's
the development of an ethos of paternal
care that increases the probability that
your children will be successful but
also in a way that increases the
probability that their children will be
successful all right so that's an
alignment with a genuine Cosmic order
not arbitrary and so there are
interpretations will'll say they're not
just ideologies they're not just
arbitrary interpretations of the way the
world lays itself out they are in
harmony with the cosmic order and that's
what makes them deep
sacred fundamental and and and in the
truest possible sense that is the proper
rejoiner to the postmodernists it's like
see this is why they insist this why
they're so anti-science in their ethos
too this is where Sam Harris has got a
point because Harris likes to make a
case for objective morality objective
it's like Transcendent is the right word
not objective but did it um did it
actually happen though I'm I'm kidding
what I what I was really interested
thinking about that and I I just had
three hours with Sam Harris where we
sort of went around on on that question
and I I agree that I think his system
fails essentially for what it's worth um
he's got a point he wants to ground
Morality In something that isn't a mere
postmodern illusion and there's
something to be said for that I want to
know how much
like the story of the Old Testament or
the Hebrew Bible the story of Abraham
okay train a large language model on
that because it's it's uh you know
integrated into the into the cosmic
order however you want to say it how far
do you go with this I mean like do you
train this this model on the New
Testament do you train it on the
Epistles we're playing with that I don't
know you train on joh milon good good
question Dante Dante well so imagine
that's a very good question so imagine
that at the foundation you have the
biblical Library okay but then you have
like you said the secondary literatures
what about the Quran we want to train a
separate one on the
Quran then we want to have them debate
yeah well it's really interesting in the
case of Islam because there's an
insistence in the Islamic world that the
entire epistemology is is actually
contained in the text and nothing else I
think the mistake that people make in
comparative religion between Islam and
Christianity is that they think that the
Bible in Christianity is what the Quran
ISL that's just not the case in Islam
the word becomes a book and in
Christianity the word becomes a person I
Think Jesus is to Christianity what the
Quran is to Islam right AB probably and
that's a big difference I think that's a
mistake that people make partly because
you know I mean the Quran is infallible
right you can't you can't think that any
word of the Quran is wrong because it's
the literal and altered word of God
the you've got AIT more more leeway say
it's mythology or maybe there's a
historical contradiction but it's not
actually that much of a problem however
if you had Jesus in front of you you
can't contradict him right I think I
think that's an important distinction
for people to for people to keep in mind
um I well that also makes yeah that also
makes the logos The Living Word yeah
right which is very that is a very makes
it more difficult to to put forwards the
the somewhat naive criticism that I
think people often make of the Gospels
as as contradicting each other because
again like we're talking like
historically here you know was Herod on
the throne at the same time cinius was
the governor of Syria as L and it's sort
of like in a sense who cares I mean one
of the points that um my friend my
friend John Nelson has has made
brilliantly is have you ever come across
the concept of the um what do they call
it the the the churchillian drift where
a bunch of quotes that Churchill never
said just get of tributed to him you
know I find I find part that's part of
the pattern of myth a if someone says
yeah I think they fall into his orbit
because they're of his type I think the
best breakfast in the morning is a glass
of champagne a hearty glass of champagne
right he never said that but people sort
of think maybe he said sounds like
something Church same thing happens with
CS Lewis now the point that that my
friend John pointed out to me was said
well if if all you had the only
information you had about Winston
Churchill was a book of apocryphal
quotes that people had attributed to him
and agreed that he'd said yeah you'd
still probably get a pretty good idea
about who Winston Churchill was
it might be easy to just toss all of
your discipline to the side for the
summer but a life of greatness doesn't
happen by taking the easy route the H
app offers an incredible range of guided
meditations and prayers that are
designed to help you deepen your
spirituality and strengthen your
connection to God with hallow you can
embark on a journey of exploration
diving into different themes and types
of prayer and meditation from gratitude
to forgiveness each session offers a
unique experience sparking your
curiosity and deepening your spiritual
understanding
you can choose different lengths of
meditation to fit your schedule whether
you have a few minutes or an hour with
its userfriendly interface and hundreds
of guided meditations the Hallow app has
quickly become a go-to resource for
people seeking spiritual growth and
healing you can download the app for
free at hall.com Jordan it allows you to
set prayer reminders and track your
progress Hall is truly transformative
and it'll help you connect with your
faith on a deeper level don't lose your
prayer habits this summer maintain your
peace and deepen your relationship with
God download the hall app today at
hall.com Jordan for an exclusive 3-month
trial that's hall.com
Jordan yeah well and that's that's
something you can do the well that's
partly because you while you you while
you put something you
see let's say
that let's say that there's a shape
there's a three-dimensional shape on the
wall and you want
to the walls like flat white you can't
really see it so what you want to do is
you want to throw a bunch of like
garbage at the wall so to speak and the
outline despite the fact that everything
you throw at the wall is garbage and it
lands in many different places if you
throw if you throw enough of it at the
wall you'll get the shape yeah well that
it's partly because you could imagine
that there's a set of Apocrypha there's
a set of sayings that have
been what misremembered a fairly
comprehensive set there you're still
going to be able to extract signal right
from there's going to be noise there's
going to be signal there that's part
because the truth will be encoded in the
panoply of the that's why it's a bigger
problem if somebody points out like some
flat historical uh if if there was
discovered just like a flat historical
contradiction in in the Quran that'd be
a big problem because the Quran is the
literal word of God if someone points
out a flat historical contradiction in
the Gospels it kind of doesn't matter as
much because you're able to to accept
that maybe that is just a contradiction
but the thing that matters is the word
of God and the word of God is not the
Gospel of Luke or the Gospel of John but
the person that they were sort of
writing about well that's that's also
partly you see that that you you just
pointed to another reason why I don't
like the over concretized questions it's
like you're looking for truth in the
wrong place there buddy I understand
that but it also depends on what kind of
truth you're looking for right because
for me as an interested third party
everything depends on that I'd really
like to know if if if Jesus actually
rose from the dead as a historical fact
I'd love to know if there was a real
Exodus you know like that's really
interesting and important to me now as
somebody who who doesn't believe that
those things did happen I still have
access to the to the meaning of the
story of something like a resurrection
well let's assume just for the sake but
I'm not a Christian it's not enough for
me to say well you know do I believe
that you know self-sacrifice is at the
basis of of of a meaningful life oh
maybe but that's not enough to make me a
Christian because I don't believe it's
the case I'm also I'm I'm quite
interested actually how I mean you're
obviously quite attracted to to
Christianity in the Christian story um I
mean you Jesus on your jacket but but
but I I'm I'm interested how that um how
that dovet tales with your insistence on
personal
responsibility as uh the way to live a
proper and meaningful life given that
the story of Jesus is one of vicarious
Redemption I sort of throw my sins on
him you know I I he takes responsibility
for the sins that I've committed yeah
well I you know I'm I wonder how go
together well I'm what would you
say no Jesus Jesus up really good to
have a Divine
Ally and I I think the more uniring you
aim upward the more you walk with God
and that does mean that Christ is beside
youh and so that is a reflection of the
truth of vicarious Redemption but that
doesn't mean you have nothing to do
right and and Christ makes that very
clear in the gospels um not everyone who
says Lord Lord will enter the kingdom of
heaven right only those who do the will
of my father you must be willing to hate
your brother and your well there there's
it just see there there's a tension
there because the vicarious Redemption
idea is a reflection of the mercy of God
it's like if you and I I believe this to
be the case as I said if your aim is
upward then God is your ally right and
so he's there with you bearing the cross
but you're still obliged to carry it
right and and you see that in the story
too that's embedded in the passion story
because there's an insistence in
traditional Christianity that the
suffering and the death that a man would
experience in that situation were real
despite the fact that God was also
experiencing it right so there's this
Duality and I think that's reflected in
the idea of arious Redemption when it's
understood properly it's like yes you'll
have here's another way of thinking
about it is
that if you aim upward uniring you have
the spirit of what's good what are you
saying you you've established a
relationship with the spirit of what's
the highest good well then that's with
you and that's that's that's that's not
just a reality it's like the Ultimate
Reality it's it's partly it's it's n
alluded to that when he said if you have
a why you can bear any how well what why
well the ultimate why well what does
that enable you to do to Bear the
ultimate how and that's exactly what the
passion story is and so there is a
vicarious Redemption there because if
you do it properly you don't have to do
it alone but that doesn't mean that
there's nothing on you you know and and
you see that too there's an
insistence in the entire biblical
library that what humans are called to
do is real like we're we're made in the
image of God we're participating in the
process by which possibility is
transformed in order we're building as
far as I'm concerned we're we're either
building the city of God or we're
building its alternative right with the
domain of Hell actually right actually
really as well as metaphysics I mean
that it's interesting you say hell and
actually in the same sentence because
well it's easier to Believe In Hell than
Heaven well one of the other criticisms
that I made of you in this video was
that I I felt like you were
appropriating religious language
illegitimately to apply a sense of the
Sacred to profane things to to mundane
things and that's perhaps one example so
I can give you a few examples I mean one
is um implied in what you just said
there but you said it I think explicitly
to to Matt frad recently uh on on PS
with the quess where you
said if if you have studied any amount
of history and you don't believe that
hell is real right right then you're an
idiot yeah defitely I understand I think
what you mean by that because hell like
you know hell is a place on Earth in in
many respects right like like if you
study history and and you look at just
like what what levels of depravity
Humanity can sync to like and you could
you could quite poetically say well if
hell isn't the right word to describe
that then I don't know what is say
something like that right but clearly
a theological conception of
hell does not exist on Planet Earth it's
somewhere you go after you die it's not
so clear I wouldn't say it's so clear C
well certainly not in um in the in like
the Jewish tradition um and and okay
maybe D maybe not in the okay maybe not
but like I mean like a a modern
Christian who asks you for example do
you believe in hell and you know that
what they mean they mean the place you
go after you go after you die then when
you respond and say sort of well of
course hell is real but you don't
believe in hell have you studied any
amount of History if if you've if you
know it's sort of it feels like you're
sort of describing two different things
equivocation the other area where this
this this largely happens I think is
when you said that the very Act of doing
science see there there's a concordance
there between that concept of Eternal
punishment in the afterlife and the hell
that is that unites all totalitarian
States but I don't know what the
concordance is like it's it's I I don't
understand like do do you do and I don't
speculate generally on anything that's
let's say Beyond Death I mean what the
hell can you say about that I don't have
anything to say about that but that's
another I don't know point right so if I
ask you for example you know do you
think that Hitler is being punished now
you know I mean he's dead but is he
being punished or or did he ever get
punished see the the answer to that
question is something
like what is the relationship between
the evanescent consciousness of man and
Eternity and the answer is we don't know
yeah when M Fred asked you do you
believe in an afterlife you said that
something like your behaviors or your
actions resonate through eternity yeah
well there's that which is you know in a
way an evasive answer too but the thing
is we don't we don't understand we exist
in relationship to the infinite
obviously what that relationship is I
don't no one knows how to conceptualize
that in the final analysis I don't
understand the relationship between our
binding temporally and Eternity like is
there something permanent about our
conscious experience I don't I don't
know I think I think you you excite your
Christian listenership when you say like
not only you know do I believe in hell
but but you can't not believe in hell I
mean are you serious you seriously don't
believe in hell and they think ah here's
a here's a here's a strong sort of
warrior well and you go while the others
but then they realize what what you mean
by hell well it's so lots of human
suffering and catastrophe you know on
plan it's more than that because it's
more than that you know because it is
the case that the invitation to hell is
offered by the Eternal usurper of the
moral order that's true you end up in
hell because you lie that's also true
and so but when you say that's true you
end up in hell because you lie what do
you mean well the totality toal allow to
use the word hell right like what is the
thing you're describing you end up where
in a totalitarian state yes and that's
fine a state of ultimate misery but I I
think this is where somebody might be
prone to confusion and you could say
that's their fault maybe it is but if
somebody's listening to you and and do
you believe in hell you say of course I
Believe In Hell how can you not believe
in hell and they go oh you know thank
goodness because that that of course is
my world you I'd love to know how I can
defend my my vision of hell and then
they realize that when you say hell what
you actually mean is something like
totalitarian guess I mean at least that
sure right and so I'm often trying to
make a minimal case right if I if I'm
trying to elaborate on the meaning of a
religious text what I'm trying to say in
all humility is it means at least this
now does that cover the entire territory
of the meaning that's very unlikely
you're going to give an exhaustive
account I don't think so what does that
mean in eternity it's the same question
and and then we should draw this part to
a close it's the same question in some
sense as the reality of the resurrection
of Christ so the Christian
interpretation is Christ defeats death
and Hell mhm okay well The Logical
objection to that is well where's the
evidence for the defeat MH since death
still exists and so does malevolence
well the Christians then will escape so
to speak into something like a symbolic
interpretation and say well it's true in
eternity and and I think fair enough
like like I do believe I do believe that
the idea that Christ defeated death and
hell is true but I don't know what that
means yeah and so and that does that
bother me well I'd rather know and I'm
continuing to investigate it but I like
I do know for example you know Anan her
Ali who recently became a Christian she
just had a conversation with Richard
Dawkins it hasn't hasn't gone out yet I
was there I had the I had the privilege
of being so I've already heard it you
know I I know what they they spoke about
but one of the things that that aan does
is and I've described it as as sort of
almost comical the way that aan talks
about her struggle with depression
suicidality total hopelessness and then
finds that by praying she's able to sort
of elevate her life and then Richard
Dawkins sort of but do you believe that
Mary was a virgin when she gave bir you
know it was funny it was I I great level
of Anis problem at the same time I sort
of understood it because yeah but and
dorkin says you but truly when you go to
church and you're having these these
these feelings you must recognize that
the things he's saying at the pulpit are
nonsense andan said that she is that
that she chooses to believe it she says
she says that I no longer find it to be
nonsense because she what she implied
and I don't want to put words in the
mouth and I can't remember but it was
something like look I I've been so
captured by this this this meaning yeah
that although I don't really understand
what it means to say that you know Jesus
was born of a virgin I just choose to
believe it well now now that's fine but
what she does what I was going to say is
what she does is is says that this to me
is like a mystery I I don't really know
exactly what it means but I but I choose
to believe that it's true and I wonder
if if if that's something like what
you're doing here when you say that you
you believe it's true I just tell my
experience has been with in this sort of
thing so I've spent a lot of time
digging into the substructure of
mythological accounts right in many
different cultures yeah now and my
experience continually is the deeper I
look the more that's there and so and
then I see things come together that
make sense that I thought were desperate
and that there doesn't seem to be any
limit to that and so now when I see
things that are desperate or even
contradictory I think well as you
already pointed out given the nature of
the biblical Library there's room for
some contradiction but more than that I
think well that might be illogical or
irrational or I might just not
understand it and my experience has been
that that presumption turns out to be
the case far more often than not and so
you know you can imagine that you can
get the apprehension of a pattern and
you can think the pattern
is the pattern is
compelling and then there are details
within the pattern that you don't know
how to reconcile but this is what aan is
doing in accordance with your account
it's like well I'm willing to I'm not
willing to forego my view of the pattern
because of some lack of concordance with
details especially given that I'm
ignorant yeah no
like well I can I can only tell
you what has been the pattern of my
investigations it's like the more deeply
I this is knocking and asking the more
deep The More I Seek the
more is
present I guess you know to to conclude
I suppose here like like so suppose I'm
somebody and and broadly this is this is
this this is true you know I I I I think
the gospel stories are are fascinating
and resonant you know I I I like the
idea of of of the the resurrection of
Christ that the way that it's it's
criticized as this evil human sacrifice
I think is is misleading you know I I'm
sort of I have all of those parts yeah
right but I'm not a Christian and and I
suppose the question in what way are you
not that's what I mean to to to help me
understand what what you mean by this
you know what is the difference between
someone who's not a Christian and not
they're not some new atheist type
they're not like I I wouldn't worship
God even they're just not a Christian
and is the difference is like 90%
Christian that's what people keep saying
about him and I I think well I think
partly because I do believe that he is
committed to the truth he does believe
that the truth will set you free he does
believe that there's an intelligible
order yeah he believes that the
investigation of the intelligible order
is redeeming this is It's a shame we
don't have a bit more time to do the
science thing perhaps that will have to
be another conversation so so you know
who is and who isn't a Christian that's
not an easy question and that's again
why I started our conversation I think
it's inappropriate for you to try to say
who is and who isn't but but just
abstractly like what you think the
difference is like what is it that you
know under what conditions Christians
hoist their cross and walk up hill right
okay so I've heard you say that before
as well right but like but that is that
is what I think that's that's the
difference not to sort of try to be too
left brained about this but like in
practice yeah what do you mean like
perhaps two sort of symmetrical
questions what conditions under which
what are the conditions under which
somebody say how careful are you with
your
words well um I try to be careful okay
well that's that's a good approximation
to Christian conduct right because
that's worship of the logos fine but but
that's really a serious part of it I
don't know if that that that will be
enough I I certainly don't know if the
word worship there is is particularly
appropriate how how much how high how
profoundly do you value it to the extent
that it helps me to convey my ideas
properly I don't worship the the the
words that I'm using themselves have the
words but the words are a tool and the
reason that I'm precise as precise as I
can be is in service of trying to
communicate my ideas to you for what
purpose so that what I am whatever it is
that I'm feeling or thinking in my head
if I could somehow take a medical
instrument and prod your brain to make
the same thought arise that would be
really helpful to me because you'd see
the world how I see it that is what
language is it's that tool except
instead of prodding your brain with
physical bit of metal and pting your
ears with vibrations in the air but I'm
trying to do the same thing I'm trying
to make that thought arise so that you
can see the world as I do and so that I
can see the world as you do to what to
what end well um I don't know well how
about um productive har harmonization of
vision fine yeah it depends on the
conversation right so like in this in
this instance it will be
um it will be I mean I came into this
conversation I suppose with with with a
goal to more thoroughly understand your
world which which is which is which is
more specific than than usually with
these conversations it would be let's
try to uh learn something from each
other and convince each other of
something and in this case I really was
just fascinated to sit down and try to
understand you know what does Jordan
Peterson think about religion like
that's probably the goal which maybe is
a slightly inappropriate goal to come
into a conversation with but that's
that's really what I've been been trying
to been trying to understand so I
suppose that's the goal so it's a the
the
idea we can wrap this up with with let's
say a Christi observation is that
there's a notion a classical Christian
notion that wherever two or more are
together in Christ's name the spirit of
God is there right okay so what does
that mean well as far as I'm concerned
what it means is that if you're uniring
in your choice of words if you're
seeking with them and exploring and I'm
doing the same and then we do that
together that's a mutually Redemptive
process that spirals upward so that's
that's a Christian endeavor one of the
conditions under which somebody can say
they're a Christian and be either lying
or wrong and the condition under which
someone can say I'm not a Christian and
be either lying or wrong if you see what
I
mean that's a very good
question well something came to mind
right away when you asked that question
like for much instantly and
said the the
the
redempt there's a there's a reason that
Christ is represented as the person who
took the sins of the world onto himself
well that's the that's the essence it's
like the world
is a a fallen
place and you have the responsibility to
do something about that and the degree
to which you take that responsibility
onto yourself that's the degree to which
you
are Christian follower of Christ it's
not it's not an on andof switch that was
it's unfair to frame it as such I
suppose it's not like you either are an
on on or off switch it's not like you're
well I think you want to make a
Christian or you're not it's like you're
more or less when when Jacob decides to
be a good person instead of a bad person
he builds an altar and it signifies his
willingness to sacrifice his his past
self I think that people decide
in many ways and maybe multiple times
whether they're going to aim up or not
now that's that initial commitment a for
it's like a baptism in a sense that you
decided that you're going to aim up okay
well now you can do that badly because
you will and you see this in the Old
Testament accounts of the prophets all
the time a lot of them are pretty
reprehensible when they first find their
feet but you can stumble your way uphill
and that that is what it that is the
essence of Christian belief is to to
stumble your way uphill with the maximum
load you can bear and the thing that's
so fascinating about that is that that's
also the pathway of maximal meaning and
that meaning is exactly what enables you
to Bear the load so it's a
very it's a very
paradoxical what would you say it's a
very paradoxical reality and and I think
the the essence of the ch faith is the
imitation of Christ it's not the
mouthing of the words now that doesn't
mean the words shouldn't be in
accordance with the commitment they
should be but but the commitment can't
be reduced to the utterance the
commitment is the carrying yeah right
and the carrying in relationship to a
goal in in the imitation of Christ it's
in the imitation the uh the text the
book you know the imitation of Christ um
you won't be judged on you won't be
judged on what you say about what you've
done yeah well then I I don't mean that
also doesn't mean that the treasure that
you stack up on Earth is a indication of
your Transcendent value right you don't
want you shouldn't fall into the
justification by works heresy right
but but with that Koda firmly in
mind I don't think there's anything in
that proposition that isn't in
accordance with the gospel
accounts I Christ calls on his disciples
to be followers right to to walk the
same path and they're given the power to
do the same things because of that and
Christ says himself that the people who
come after him which means us will be
capable of more than he managed right
well
that's that doesn't mean that there's no
Redemption by proxy let's say because we
already covered that is that if you aim
up you have the spirit that's inviting
you
up you've invited it to take residence
in you and that's that's true that's
true as far as I can see I think it's
the most accurate way of construing the
the situation that does give you a form
of it gives you what I am found right it
gives you a
spine um but that doesn't that doesn't
mean you don't have a
cross right and and that you see that
insistence in the gospel accounts as I
said you know the insistence that Christ
suffered as a man
despite having
God what being
God that's those are both true at the
same time so the Christian pathway is
the pathway of maximal self-sacrificial
responsibility right right well I hope
those who have been wondering uh whether
you should be
legitimately called a Christian in their
worldview in their version of
Christianity will will be helped by this
by this conversation I mean I suppose
that's in part what I'm I'm I'm trying
to do too here is for people who who
sort of who say to you you know just
just say what you think it's complicated
you know but hopefully um well I am
trying to say what I think it's just
that you know the world's a complicated
Place yeah well hopefully we're to make
it's nice to get your words in pristine
order but the more complicated the topic
the longer it takes to manage that with
Stellar Precision yeah well it's taking
us more probably nearly two hours now
just to to to get about around to the
idea of maybe well maybe you don't know
if if uh the Jews walked through the the
Egyptian desert but maybe that also
they're still walk maybe maybe they're
still
walk good to talk to you it's been fun
all right so everyone I'm going to
continue this conversation we're going
to continue this conversation on The
Daily wire platform and so um I think
I'll talk to Alex a bit something a bit
more personally
um I want to find out how he managed his
podcast and why he's interested in the
things he's interested in what his
Pathway to that uh occupation was and
what his hopes for the future are and
all of that and so if you want to join
us on the daily wi side please do thank
you to the film crew here we're in LA
right we're in LA and thank you very
much for coming all the way from London
that it's very good and it was a fine
conversation much appreciated enjoyed
and thank you all of you who are
watching and listening for your time and
attention we hopefully we'll see you on
the daily wire side and if not then well
for the next podcast
[Music]